# Annexures A through H with Appendices

Annexure A - Exchange of Notes between Goverment of India and Goverment of Pakistan

Annexure B - Agricultural use by Pakistan from certain tributaries of the Ravi - (Article II (3))

1. The provisions of this Annexure shall apply with respect to the Agricultural Use by Pakistan from certain Tributaries of The Ravi under the provisions of Article, II (3) and, subject to the provisions of this Annexure, such use shall be unrestricted.

2. Pakistan may withdraw from the Basantar Tributary of the Ravi such waters as may be available and necessary for the irrigation of not more than 100 acres annually.

3. In addition to the area specified in Paragraph 2, Pakistan may also withdraw such waters from each of the following Tributaries of The Ravi as may be available and as may be necessary for the irrigation of that part of the following areas cultivated on sailab as on the Effective Date which cannot be so cultivated after that date: Provided that the total area whether irrigated or cultivated on sailab shall not exceed the limits specified below, except during a year of exceptionally heavy floods when sailab may extend to areas which were not cultivated on sailab as on the Effective Date and when such areas may be cultivated in addition to the limits specified:

Name of Tributary  Maximum Amount Cultivation (acres)
Basantar           14,000 
Bein               26,600 
Tarnah             1,800 
Ujh                3,000

4. The provisions of Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall not be construed as giving Pakistan any claim or right to any releases by India in the Tributaries mentioned in these paragraphs.
5. Not later than 31st March 1961, Pakistan shall furnish to India a statement by Districts and Tehsils showing (i) the area irrigated and (ii) the area cultivated on sailab, as on the Effective Date, from the waters of each of the Tributaries specified in Paragraphs 2 and 3.
6. As soon as the statistics for each crop year (commencing with the beginning of kharif and ending with the end of the following rabi) have been compiled at the District Headquarters, but not later than the 30th November following the end of that crop year, Pakistan shall furnish to India a statement arranged by Tributaries and showing for each
of the Districts and Tehsils irrigated or cultivated on sailab from the Tributaries mentioned in Paragraphs 2 and 3:
(i) the area irrigated, and
(ii) the area cultivated on sailab.

Annexure C - Agricultural use by India from the western rivers - Article III(2)(c)
1. The provisions of this Annexure shall apply with respect to the Agricultural Use
by India from the Western Rivers under the provisions of Article III (2) (c) and, subject
to the provisions of this Annexure, such use shall be unrestricted.

2. As used in this Annexure, the term "Irrigated Cropped Area" means the total area
under irrigated crops in a year, the same area being counted twice if it bears different
crops in kharif and rabi. The term shall be deemed to exclude small blocks of ghair
mumkim lands in an irrigated field, lands on which cultivation is dependent on rain or
snow and to which no irrigation water is applied, areas naturally inundated by river flow
and cultivated on sailab thereafter, any area under floating gardens or demb lands in and
along any lakes, and any area under waterplants growing within the water-spread of any
lake or in standing water in a natural depression.

3. India may withdraw from the Chenab Main such waters as India may need for
Agricultural Use on the following canals limited to the maximum withdrawals noted
against each :

Name of Canal Maximum Withdrawals for Agricultural Use
(a) Ranbir Canal     1,000 cusecs from 15th April to 14th October, and 
                      350 cusecs from 15th October to 14th April.

(b) Pratap Canal     400 cusecs from 15th April to 14th October, and 
                      100 cusecs from 15th October to 14th April.

Provided that :

(i) The maximum withdrawals shown above shall be exclusive of any withdrawals which
may be made through these canals for purposes of silt extraction on condition that
the waters withdrawn for silt extraction are returned to The Chenab.
(ii) India may make additional withdrawals through the Ranbir Canal up to 250 cusecs
for hydro-electric generation on condition that the waters so withdrawn are returned
to The Chenab.
(iii) If India should construct a barrage across the Chenab Main below the head regulators
of these two canals, the withdrawals to be then made, limited to the amounts specified
in (a) and (b) above, during each 10-day period or subperiod thereof, shall be as determined
by the Commission in accordance with sound irrigation practice and, in the
absence of agreement between the Commissioners, by a Neutral Expert in accordance
with the provisions of Annexure F.

4. Apart from the irrigation from the Ranbir and Pratap Canals under the provisions
of Paragraph 3, India may continue to irrigate from the Western Rivers those areas
which were so irrigated as on the Effective Date.

5. In addition to such withdrawals as may be made in accordance with the provisions
of Paragraphs 3 and 4, India may, subject to the provisions of Paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 9,
make further withdrawals from the Western Rivers to the extent India may consider
necessary to meet the irrigation needs of the areas specified below :
Particulars                                                          Maximum Irrigated Cropped Area 
                                                                    (over and above the cropped area irrigated under the provisions of Paragraphs 3 and 4) (acres)
(a) From The Indus, in its drainage basin................................70,000
(b) From The Jhelum, in its drainage basin...............................400,000
(c) From The Chenab,
  (i) in its drainage basin..............................................225,000 of which are not more than 100,000 acres will be in the Jammu District
  (ii) outside its drainage basin in the area west of the Deg Nadi 
      (also called Devak River), the aggregate capacity of irrigating 
      channels leading out of the drainage basin of the Chenab to this 
      area not to exceed 120 cusecs......................................6,000


Provided that
(i) in addition to the maximum Irrigated Cropped Area specified above, India may
irrigate road-side trees from any source whatever;
(ii) the maximum Irrigated Cropped Area shown against items (a), (b) and (c) (i) above
shall be deemed to include cropped areas, if any, irrigated from an open well, a tubewell,
a spring, a lake (other than a Connecting lake) or a tank, in excess of the areas
so irrigated as on the Effective Date; and
(iii) the aggregate of the areas specified against items (a), (b) and (c) (i) above may be redistributed
among the three drainage basins in such manner as may be agreed upon
between the Commissioners.
6. (a) Within the limits of the maximum Irrigated Cropped Areas specified against
items (b) and (c) (i) in Paragraph 5, there shall be no restriction on the development of
such of these areas as may be irrigated from an open well, a tube-well, a spring, a lake
(other than a Connecting Lake) or a tank.
(b) Within the limits of the maximum Irrigated Cropped Areas specified against
items (b) and (c) in Paragraph 5, there shall be no restriction on the development of such
of these areas as may be irrigated from General Storage (as defined in Annexure E) ; the
areas irrigated from General Storage may, however, receive irrigation from river flow also,
but, unless the Commissioners otherwise agree, only in the following periods :-
(i) from The Jhelum: 21st June to 20th August
(ii) from The Chenab: 21st June to 31st August:
Provided that withdrawals for such irrigation, whether from General Storage or from
river flow, are controlled by Government.
7. Within the limits of the maximum Irrigated Cropped Areas specified against
items (b) and (c) in Paragraph 5, the development of these areas by withdrawals from river flow (as distinct from withdrawals from General Storage cum river flow in accordance
with Paragraph 6 (b)) shall be regulated as follows :
(a) Until India can release water from Conservation Storage (as defined in Annexure E)
in accordance with sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) below, the new area developed shall
not exceed the following :
(i) from The Jhelum : 150,000 acres
(ii) from The Chenab: 25,000 acres during the Transition Period and 50,000 acres after
the end of the Transition Period.
(b) In addition to the areas specified in (a) above, there may be developed from The
Jhelum or The Chenab an aggregate area of 150,000 acres if there is released annually
from Conservation Storage, in accordance with Paragraph 8, a volume of 0.2 MAF
into The Jhelum and a volume of 0.1 MAF into The Chenab ; provided that India
shall have the option to store on and release into The Chenab the whole or a part of the
volume of 0.2 MAF specified above for release into The Jhelum.
(c) Any additional areas over and above those specified in (a) and (b) above may be developed
if there is released annually from Conservation Storage a volume of 0.2 MAF
into The Jhelum or The Chenab, in accordance with Paragraph 8, in addition to the
releases specified in (b) above.
8. The releases from Conservation Storage, as specified in Paragraphs 7 (b) and 7 (c),
shall be made in accordance with a schedule to be determined by the Commission which
shall keep in view, first, the effect, if any, on Agricultural Use by Pakistan consequent on
the reduction in supplies available to Pakistan as a result of the withdrawals made by
India under the provisions of Paragraph 7 and, then, the requirements, if any, of hydroelectric
power to be developed by India from these releases. In the absence of agreement
between the Commissioners, the matter may be referred under the provisions of Article IX
(2) (a) for decision to a Neutral Expert.
9. On those Tributaries of The Jhelum on which there is any Agricultural Use or
hydro-electric use by Pakistan, any new Agricultural Use by India shall be so made as not
to affect adversely the then existing Agricultural Use or hydro-electric use by Pakistan
on those Tributaries.
10. Not later than 31st March 1961, India shall furnish to Pakistan a statement
showing, for each of the Districts and Tehsils irrigated from the Western Rivers, the Irrigated
Cropped Area as on the Effective Date (excluding only the area irrigated under the
provisions of Paragraph 3), arranged in accordance with items (a), (b) and (c)(i) of Paragraph
5 : Provided that in the case of areas in the Punjab, the date may be extended to
30th September 1961.
11. (a) As soon as the statistics for each crop year (commencing with the beginning
of kharif and ending with the end of the following rabi) have been compiled at the District
Headquarters, but not later than the 30th November following the end of that crop year,
India shall furnish to Pakistan a statement showing for each of the Districts and Tehsils
irrigated from the Western Rivers, the total Irrigated Cropped Areas (excluding the area
irrigated under the provisions of Paragraph 3) arranged in accordance with items (a), (b),
(c) (i) and (c) (ii) of Paragraph 5 : Provided that, in the case of areas in the Punjab, the
30th November date specified above may be extended to the following 30th June in the
event of failure of communications.
(b) If the limits specified in Paragraph 7 (a) or 7 (b) are exceeded for any crop year,
the statement shall also show the figures for Irrigated Cropped Areas falling under Paragraph
6 (a) and 6 (b) respectively, unless appropriate releases from Conservation Storage
under the provisions of Paragraph 8 have already begun to be made.


Annexure D - Generation of Hydro-Electric power by India on the western rivers - (Article III (2)(d))
1. The provisions of this Annexure shall apply with respect to the use by India of
the waters of the Western Rivers for the generation of hydro-electric power under the
provisions of Article III (2)(d) and, subject to the provisions of this Annexure, such use
shall be unrestricted: Provided that the design, construction and operation of new hydroelectric
plants which are incorporated in a Storage Work (as defined in Annexure E) shall
be governed by the relevant provisions of Annexure E.

PART I-DEFINITIONS
2. As used in this Annexure :
(a) "Dead Storage" means that portion of the storage which is not used fur operational
purposes and "Dead Storage Level" means the level corresponding to Dead Storage.
(b) "Live Storage" means all storage above Dead Storage.
(c) "Pondage" means Live Storage of only sufficient magnitude to meet fluctuations in the
discharge of the turbines arising from variations in the daily and the weekly loads of the
plant.
(d) "Full Pondage Level" means the level corresponding to the maximum Pondage provided
in the design in accordance with Paragraph 8 (c).
(e) "Surcharge Storage" means uncontrollable storage occupying space above the Full
Pondage Level.
(f) "Operating Pool" means the storage capacity between Dead Storage level and Full
Pondage Level.
(g) "Run-of-River Plant" means a hydro-electric plant that develops power without
Live Storage as an integral part of the plant, except for Pondage and Surcharge
Storage.
(h} "Regulating Basin" means the basin whose only purpose is to even out fluctuations in
the discharge from the turbines arising from variations in the daily and the weekly
loads of the plant.
(i) "Firm Power" means the hydro-electric power corresponding to the minimum mean
discharge at the site of a plant, the minimum mean discharge being calculated as
follows:
The average discharge for each 10-day period (1st to 10th, 11th to 20th and 21st
to the end of the month) will be worked out for each year for which discharge data,
whether observed or estimated, are proposed to be studied for purposes of design.
The mean of the yearly values for each 10-day period will then be worked out. The
lowest of the mean values thus obtained will be taken as the minimum mean discharge.
The studies will be based on data for as long a period as available but may
be limited to the latest 5 years in the case of Small Plants (as defined in Paragraph 18)
and to the latest 25 years in the case of other Plants (as defined in Paragraph 8).
(j) "Secondary Power" means the power, other than Firm Power, available only during
certain periods of the year.



Appendix I to Annexure D (Paragraph 5)
Appendix II to Annexure D (Paragraph 9)
Appendix III to Annexure D
Annexure E - Storage of Waters by India on the Western Rivers (Article III(4))
Appendix to Annexure E (Paragraphs 4 and 12)
Annexure F - Neutral Expert (Article IX (2)) - Questions to be referred to a neutral expert
Annexure G - Court of Arbitration (Article IX(5))
Appendix to Annexure G (Paragraph 7 (b))
Annexure H - Transitional Arrangements (Article II(5)) Part I - Preliminary
Appendix #1 to Annexure H - Provisionss for time-lag and for determination of the 'Sutlej Component at Ferozepore' and the 'Beas Component at Ferozepore'
Appendix #2 to Annexure H - Forms of Water-Account



Appendix III to Annexure H
Calculations for determining proportionate working expenses to be paid by Pakistan under the provisions of paragraphs 48 and 50 of this Annexure
1. Until Pakistan exercises the option under the provisions of Paragraph 20 of this Annexure, the proportionate working expenses payable by it under the provisions of Paragraphs 48 and 50 of this Annexure shall be (X per cent of A) plus B, where:
(a) For the year commencing on 1st April 1960, X equals 100; and from the year commencing 1st April 1961, X = (202/365)*100;
(b) A is the aggregate sum of the following:
(i) 45 per cent of the 'working expenses' during the year on Madhopur Headworks;
(ii) 65.5 percent of the 'working expenses' during the year on "II Main Canals and Branches" (carrier channel only); and
(iii) 66.8% of the 'working expenses' during the year on 'III Distributaries' (carrier channel only); and 
(c) B is a fixed overhead charge equal to Pounds Sterling 60,000 per year.

2. The 'working expenses' for the purpose of paragraph 1 shall consist of:
   (i) Expenditure under account heads Maintenance and Repairs, Extensions and Improvements, and Tools and Plant, and
   (ii) Pro-rata establishment charges on account of Divisional and Circle Offices and Chief Engineers' Direction Charges.

3. The proportionate working expenses payable by Pakistan shall be morified, in accordance with paragraph 4 below, if
   (a) India should bring into operation any new channel to irrigate any part of the areas which were irrigated, before the Effective Date, from the Lahore Branch and the Main Branch Lower; or
   (b) Pakistan should desire to reduce
     (i) the period specified in Paragraph 7 of this Annexure; or 
     (ii) the maximum quantities (in cusecs) specified in Paragraph 7 of this Annexure; or
   (c) any change is made in the period or quantity of deliveries to the C.B.D.C., in accordance with the provisions of Paragraphs 10 or 11 of this Annexure.

   In case of (b) above, Pakistan shall give India due notice of its intentions, such notice to reach India at least six months before the date from which change is sought.

4. (a) Under the conditions envisaged in paragraph 3(a) above, Pakistan shall pay 100 percent of the 'working expenses' on such Branches or Distributaries as carry supplies for Pakistan only and for the remaining carrier channels the percentages given in paragraph 1(b)(ii) or 1(b)(iii} above shall be re-calculated on the basis of ratio of cusec-miles to be delivered by the remaining channels to Pakistan (with pro-rata addition on account of absorption losses) to the aggregate of cusec-miles of the remaining channels (on the basis of 1948 capacities), the cusec-milcs for each such channel being worked out separately.
 (b) If there is a reduction in the period specified in Paragraph 7 of this Annexure, as envisaged under paragraph 3 (b) (i) or 3 (c) above, the factor X in paragraph I (a) above will be taken as equal to:
(number of days during which C.B.D.C. is due to receive supplies from U.B.D.C.) / (number of days in the year)
(c) In the event that there is a reduction in the maximum quantities specified in Paragraph 7 of this Annexure as mentioned in paragraphs 3(b)(ii) or 3(c) above, the percentages in paragraphs I(b)(i), (b)(ii) and (b)(iii) above will be reduced pro-rata.

Appendix IV to Annexure H
Calculations for determining proportionate working expenses to be paid by Pakistan under the provisions of paragraphs 49 and 50 of this annexure
1. Until Pakistan exercises the option under the provisions of Paragraph 64 of this Annexurn, the proportionate working expenses payable by it under the provisions of Paragraphs 49 and 50 of this Annexure shall be X per cent of (A plus B) where:
(a) For each of the three years commencing on 1st April 1960, 1st April 1961 and 1st April 196l, X equals 51 ; and from the year commencing 1st April 1963, X equals 80;
(b) A is the aggregate sum of the 'working expenses' during the year; and
(c) B is a fixed overhead charge equal to Pounds Sterling 110,000.
2. The 'working expenses' for the purpose of paragraph I above shall consist of :
(i) expenditure on the Ferozepore Headworks (including the part of the Dipalpur Canal in India) under account heads Maintenance and Repairs, Extensions and Improvements, and Tools and Plant;
(ii) pro-rata establishment charges on account of the Divisional and Circle Offices and Chief Engineers' Direction Charges ; and
(iii) expenditure on 'Minor Works 18A (2) Miscellaneous' (discharge observations at Ferozepore). 

