#IWT1960
#Articles 1 through 16

Article I - Definitions

1) The terms "Article" and "Annexure" means respectively an Article of, and an Annexure to, this Treaty. Except as otherwise indidicated, references to Paragraphs are to the paragraphs in the Article or in the Annexure in which the reference is made.

2) The term "Tributary" of a river means any surface channel, whether in continuous or intermittent flow and by whatever name called, whose waters in the natural course would fall into that river, e.g. a tributary, a torrent, a natural drainage, an artifical drainage, a nadi, a nallah, a nai, a khad, a cho. The term also includes any subtributary or branch or subsidiary channel, by whatever name called, whose waters, in the natural course, would directly or otherwise flow into that surface channel.

3) The term "The Indus," "The Jhelum," "The Chenab," "The Ravi," "The Beas" or "The Sutlej means the named river (including Connecting Lakes, if any) and all its Tributaries: Provided however that
i) none of the rivers above shall be deemed to be a Tributary
ii) The Chenab shall be deemed to include the river Panjnad; and
iii) the river Chandra and the river Bhaga shall be deemed to be Tributaries of The Chenab.

4) The term "Main" added after Indus, Jhelum, Chenab, SUtlej, Beas or Ravi means the main stem of the named river exlcuding its Tributaries, but inlcuding all channels and creeks of the main stem of that river and such Connecting Lakes as form part of the main stem itself. The Jhelum Main shall be deemed to extend up to Verinag, and the Chenab Main up to the confluence of the river Chandra and the river Bhaga.

5) The term "Eastern Rivers" means The Sutlej, The Beas and the Ravi taken together.
 
6) The term "Western Rivers" means The Indus, The Jhelum, and The Chenab taken together.

7) The term "the Rivers" means all the rivers, The Sutlej, The Beas, The Ravi, The Indus, The Jhelum and The Chenab.

8) The term "Connecting Lake" means any lake which receives water from, or yields water to, any of the Rivers; but any lake which occasionally and irregularly receives only the spill of any of the Rivers and returns only the whole or part of that spill is not a Connecting Lake.

9) The term "Agricultural Use" means the use of water for irrigation, except for irrigation of household gardens and public recreational gardens.

10) The term "Domestic Use" means the use of water for:
(a) drinking, washing, bathing, recreation, sanitation (including the conveyance and dilution of sewage and of industrial and other wastes), stock and poultry, and other like purposes;
(b) household and municpal purposes (including use for household gardens and public recreational gardens); and
(c) industrial purposes (including mining, milling and other like purposes); but the term does not include Agricultural Use or use for the generation of hydro-electric power.

11) The term "Non-Consumptive Use" means any control or use of water for navigation, floating of timber or other property, flood protection or flood control,
fishing or fish culture, wild life or other like benficial purposes, provided that, exclusive of seepage and evaporation of water incidential to the control or use, the water (undiminshed in volume within the practical range of measurement) remains in, or is returned to, the same river or its tributaries' but the term does not include Agricultural Use or use for the generation of hydro-electric power.

12) The term "Transition Period" means the period beginning and ending as provided in Article II(6).

13) The term "Bank" means the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
14) The term "Commissioner" means either of the Commissioners appointed under the provisions of Article VIIII (1) and the term "Commission" means the Permanent Indus Commission constituted in accordance with Article VIII (3).
15) The term "interference with the waters" means:
(a) Any act of withdrawal therefrom ; or
(b) Any man-made obstruction to their flow which causes a change in the volume (within the practical range of measurement) of the daily flow of the waters:
Provided however that an obstruction which involves only an insiginicant and incidental change in the volume of the daily flow, for example, fluctuations due to afflux caused by bridge piers or a temporary by-pass, etc., shall not be deemed to be an interference with the waters. 
16) The term "Effective Date" means the date on which this Treaty takes effect in accordance with the provisions of Article XII, that is, the first of April 1960.

Article II - Provisions regarding eastern rivers
(1) All the waters of the Eastern Rivers shall be available for the unrestricted use of India, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Article.
(2) Except for Domestic Use and Non-Consumptive Use, Pakistan shall be under an obligation to let flow, and shall not permit any interference with, the waters of the Sutlej Main and the Ravi Main in the reaches where these rivers flow in Pakistan and have not yet finally crossed into Pakistan. The points of final crossing are the following:
(a) near the new Hasta Bund upstream of Suleimanke in the case of the Sutlej Main, and (b) about one and a half miles upstream of the syphon for the B-R-B-D Link in the case of the Ravi Main.
(3) Except for Domestic Use, Non-Consumptive Use and Agricultural (as specified in Annexure B), Pakistan shall be under an obligation to let flow, and shall not permit any interference with, the waters (while flowing in Pakistan) of any Tributary which in its natural course joins the Sutlej Main or the Ravi Main before these rivers have finally crossed into Pakistan.
(4) All the waters, while flowing in Pakistan, of any Tributary which, in its natural course, joins the Sutlej Main or the Ravi Main after these rivers have finally crossed into Pakistan shall be available for the unrestricted use of Paksitan: Provided however that this provision shall not be construed as giving Pakistan any claim or right to any releases by India in any such Tributary. If Pakistan should deliver any Main fter this river has finally crossed into Pakistan, into a reach of the Ravi Main upstream of this crossing, India shall not make use of these waters; each Party agrees to be necessary for the determination of the component of water available for the use of Pakistan on account of the aforesaid deliveries by Pakistan, and Pakistan agrees to meet the cost of establishing the aforesaid discharge obersation stations and making the aforesaid observations.
(5) There shall be a Transition Period during which, to the extent specified in Annexure H, India shall
(i) limit its withdrawls for Agricultural Use,
(ii) limit abstractions for storages, and 
(iii) make deliveries to Pakistan from the Eastern Rivers.
(6) The Transition Period shall begin on 1st April 1960 and it shall end on 31st March 1970, or, if extended underthe provisions of Part 8 of Annexure H, on the date up to which it has been extended. In any event, whether or not the replacement referred to in Article IV (1) has been accomplished, the Transition Period shall end not later than 31st March 1973.
(7) If the Transition Period is extended beyond 31st March 1970, the provisions of Article V (5) shall apply.
(8) If the Transition Period is extended beyond 31st March 1970, the provisions of Paragraph (5) shall apply during the period of extension beyond 31st March 1970.
(9) During the Transition Period, Pakistan shall receive for unrestricted use the waters of the Eastern Rivers which are to be released by India in accordannce with the provisions of Annexure H. After the end of the Transition Period, Pakistan shall have no claim or right to releases by India of any of the waters of the Eastern Rivers. In case there are any releases, Pakistan shall enjoy the unrestricted use of the waters so released after they have finally crossed into Pakistan: Provided that in the event that Pakistan makes any use of these waters, Pakistan shall not acquire any right whatsoever, by prescription or otherwise, to a continuance of such releases or such use. 

Article III - Provisions regarding western rivers
(1) Pakistan shall receive for unrestricted use all those waters of the Western Rivers which India  is under obligation to let flow under the provisions of Paragraph (2).
(2) India shall be under an obligation to let flow all the waters of the Western Rivers, and shall not permit any interference with these waters, except for the following uses, restricted (except as provided in item (c) (ii) of Paragraph 5 of Annexure C) 1 in the case of each of the rivers, The Indus, The Jhelum and The Chenab, to the drainage basin thereof:
(a) Domestic Use ;
(b) Non-Consumptive Use;
(c) Agricultural Use, as set out in Annexure C; and
(d) Generation of hydro-electric power, as set out in Annexure D.
(3) Pakistan shall have the unrestricted use of all waters originating from sources other than the Eastern Rivers which are delivered by Pakistan into The Ravi or The Sutlej, and India shall not make use of these waters.  Each Party agrees to establish such discharge observation stations and make such observations as may be considered necessary by the Commission for the determination of the component of water available for the use of Pakistan on account of the aforesaid deliveries by Pakistan.
(4) Except as provided in Annexures D and E, India shall not store any water of, or construct any storage works on, the Western Rivers.

Article IV - PROVISIONS REGARDING EASTERN RIVERS AND WESTERN RIVERS
(1) Pakistan shall use its best endeavours to construct and bring into operation,
with due regard to expedition and economy, that part of a system of works which will
accomplish the replacement, from the Western Rivers and other sources, of water
supplies for irrigation canals in Pakistan which, on 15th August 1947, were dependent
on water supplies from the Eastern Rivers.
(2) Each Party agrees that any Non-Consumptive Use made by it shall be so
made as not to materially change, on account of such use, the flow in any channel to
the prejudice of the uses on that channel by the other Party under the provisions of
this Treaty. In executing any scheme of flood protection or flood control each Party
will avoid, as far as practicable, any material damage to the other Party, and any
such scheme carried out by India on the Western Rivers shall not involve any use of
water or any storage in addition to that provided under Article III.
(3) Nothing in this Treaty shall be construed as having the effect of preventing
either Party from undertaking schemes of drainage, river training, conservation of soil
against erosion and dredging, or from removal of stones, gravel or sand from the beds
of the Rivers : Provided that
(a) in executing any of the schemes mentioned above, each Party will avoid, as far
as practicable, any material damage to the other Party ;
(b) any such scheme carried out by India on the Western Rivers shall not involve any
use of water or any storage in addition to that provided under Article III;
(c) except as provided in Paragraph (5) and Article VII (1) (b), India shall not take
any action to increase the catchment area, beyond the area on the Effective Date,
of any natural or artificial drainage or drain which crosses into Pakistan, and shall
not undertake such construction or remodelling of any drainage or drain which
so crosses or falls into a drainage or drain which so crosses as might cause material
damage in Pakistan or entail the construction of a new drain or enlargement of an
existing drainage or drain in Pakistan ; and
(d) should Pakistan desire to increase the catchment area, beyond the area on the
Effective Date, of any natural or artificial drainage or drain, which receives
drainage waters from India, or, except in an emergency, to pour any waters into
it in excess of the quantities received by it as on the Effective Date, Pakistan shall,
before undertaking any work for these purposes, increase the capacity of that
drainage or drain to the extent necessary so as not to impair its efficacy for dealing
with drainage waters received from India as on the Effective Date.
(4) Pakistan shall maintain in good order its portions of the drainages mentioned
below with capacities not less than the capacities as on the Effective Date :
(i) Hudiara Drain
(ii) Kasur N ala
(iii) Salimshah Drain
(iv) Fazilka Drain.
(5) If India finds it necessary that any of the drainages mentioned in Paragraph
(4) should be deepened or widened in Pakistan, Pakistan agrees to undertake to do so
as a work of public interest, provided India agrees to pay the cost of the deepening or
widening.
(6) Each Party will use its best endeavours to maintain the natural channels of
the Rivers, as on the Effective Date, in such condition as will avoid, as far as practicable,
any obstruction to the flow in these channels likely to cause material damage
to the other Party.
(7) Neither Party will take any action which would have the effect of diverting
the Ravi Main between Madhopur and Lahore, or the Sutlej Main between Harike
and Suleimanke, from its natural channel between high banks.
(8) The use of the natural channels of the Rivers for the discharge of flood or
other excess waters shall be free and not subject to limitation by either Party, and
neither Party shall have any claim against the other in respect of any damage caused
by such use. Each Party agrees to communicate to the other Party, as far in advance
as practicable, any information it may have in regard to such extraordinary discharges
of water from reservoirs and flood flows as may affect the other Party.
(9) Each Party declares its intention to operate its storage dams, barrages an<l
irrigation canals in such manner, consistent with the normal operations of its hydraulic
systems, as to avoid, as far as feasible, material damage to the other Party.
(10) Each Party declares its intention to prevent, as far as practicable,
undue pollution of the waters of the Rivers which might affect adversely uses similar
in nature to those to which the waters were put on the Effective Date, and agrees to
take all reasonable measures to ensure that, before any sewage or industrial waste is
allowed to flow into the Rivers, it will be treated, where necessary, in such manner
as not materially to affect those uses : Provided that the criterion of reasonableness
shall be the customary practice in similar situations on the Rivers.
(11) The Parties agree to adopt, as far as feasible, appropriate measures for the
recovery, and restoration to owners, of timber and other property floated or floating
down the Rivers, subject to appropriate charges being paid by the owners.
(12) The use of water for industrial purposes under Articles II (2), II (3) and
III (2) shall not exceed :
(a) in the case of an industrial process known on the Effective Date, such quantum
of use as was customary in that process on the Effective Date ;
(b) in the case of an industrial process not known on the Effective Date:
{i) such quantum of use as was customary on the Effective Date in similar or in
any way comparable industrial processes; or
(ii) if there was no industrial process on the Effective Date similar or in any way
comparable to the new process, such quantum of use as would not have a
substantially adverse effect on the other Party.
{13) Such part of any water withdrawn for Domestic Use under the provisions
of Articles II {3) and III (2) as is subsequently applied to Agricultural Use shall be
accounted for as part of the Agricultural Use specified in Annexure B and Annexure C
respectively; each Party will use its best endeavours to return to the same river
(directly or through one of its Tributaries) all water withdrawn therefrom for industrial
purposes and not consumed either in the industrial processes for which it was
withdrawn or in some other Domestic Use.
{14) In the event that either Party should develop a use of the waters of the
Rivers which is not in accordance with the provisions of this Treaty, that Party
shall not acquire by reason of such use any right, by prescription or otherwise, to
a continuance of such use.
(15) Except as otherwise required by the express provisions of this Treaty,
nothing in this Treaty shall be construed as affecting existing territorial rights over the
waters of any of the Rivers or the beds or banks thereof, or as affecting existing
property rights under municipal law over such waters or beds or banks.


















